---
permalink: /lassie/
title: Lassie
heading: My take on the Szekeres Class-A amplifier
subheading: Subtle tweaks and a really nice enclosure
layout: project
bar: top
images:
  - file: ampA-sch.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the quite-famous szekeres amplifier schematic, as you can see.
  - file: ampA-lay.png
    width: 400
    height: 600
    tip: >
      my layout for the first revision design. the TO-220 active devices
      actually lie flat and mount to the case, but this is not shown here.
  - file: ampA-bot.png
    width: 400
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the bottom copper image of the first revision board design. don't use
      this in new designs, a better version exists.
  - file: ampB-sch.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      my modified szekeres amplifier, still with the constant-current source
      as a load to the mosfet source.
  - file: ampB-lay.png
    width: 469
    height: 600
    tip: >
      my layout for the first second design. again the TO-220 actives lay
      flat. instead of being square, the board is L-shaped, with a cutout
      where the huge electrolytic lays down.
  - file: ampB-bot.png
    width: 469
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the bottom copper image of the second revision board design.
  - file: diff-resp.png
    width: 424
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the frequency and phase responses of the vanilla szekeres and my
      version.
  - file: diff-tran.png
    width: 800
    height: 565
    tip: >
      the transient at 1kHz of the vanilla szekeres and my version.
  - file: psu-sch.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a basic CLC-smoothed and regulated 15V/3A DC supply for the amplifier.
  - file: psu-lay.png
    width: 800
    height: 373
    tip: >
      my layout for the power supply. i put thought into the enclosure
      design long before making this, so mount holes were really a
      no-brainer. even still, you'll see i had to hack the board to get it
      to fit...
  - file: psu-bot.png
    width: 800
    height: 373
    tip: >
      the bottom copper image of the power supply board design.
  - file: amp-pic01.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      feels like christmas!!! :P
  - file: amp-pic02.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the parts bin and transparencies.
  - file: amp-pic03.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a closer look at how i epoxied two transparencies together to produce
      finer traces on the circuit boards. line up the two sheets well!
  - file: amp-pic04.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the first revision etched circuit board, ready for drilling and
      cutting.
  - file: amp-pic05.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the final cut first revision boards. a bandsaw worked beautifully to
      cut these boards, without any removal of copper or required sanding.
  - file: amp-pic06.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the first test jig, with the amplifier sitting on top of the case for
      heat sinking. you see the input and output signals on the scope.
  - file: amp-pic07.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a shot of the first revision amp output when driven to clipping. you
      can see that, at the onset of clipping, the peaks are clipped
      asymmetrically, which means second-harmonic distortion, mostly.
  - file: amp-pic08.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the two finished first revision boards, sitting on some scrap oak.
  - file: amp-pic09.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a comparison of the original szekeres design to my modified design.
      not too different, just some honkin huge caps...
  - file: amp-pic10.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the completed and connected amplifier and power supply, ready for the
      first ever listening test with everything buttoned up!
  - file: case-pic01.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the precisely milled aluminum chunk, with untapped side-panel mount
      holes and a random spot drill...
  - file: case-pic02.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      beginning to endmill out the interior of the case.
  - file: case-pic03.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      halfway done milling out the inside! it's already starting to look
      like the final product!
  - file: case-pic04.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the rough cut final case, showing how the #10-24 flat socket screws
      enter.
  - file: case-pic05.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the case after a polish treatment. oooooh shiny!!!
  - file: case-pic06.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the case and roughly cut red oak sides, yet to be sanded.
  - file: case-pic07.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a picture of the sanding setup. this stage took for-EVER!
  - file: case-pic08.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      both wood panels ready to be milled, showing their orientation on the
      case.
  - file: case-pic09.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      mounted, milled wood side panels.
  - file: case-pic10.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the panels after two coats of minwax cherry stain.
  - file: case-pic11.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the essentially finished case, looking handsome if i do say so myself.
  - file: case-pic12.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the side panels, with a bit of room milled out for safe measure...
  - file: psu-pic01.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the TO-3 mounting segment, showing how the two pins exit the mount
      through nylon insulating rings. the two case-mounting screws are
      similarly insulated using rings and washers. that way neither the top
      nor bottom of the case are at any dangerous voltage.
  - file: psu-pic02.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      all aluminum parts milled and the wood panels are getting there. you
      can see the LM350K mounts beautifully on its aluminum segment. thank
      God for those datasheets!
  - file: psu-pic03.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      this pic shows what a large effect wet sanding with just 600-grit
      sandpaper can have on aluminum.
  - file: psu-pic04.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a test of the integrated amber switch LED. a lesson for the kids out
      there: when in doubt, try 20mA. :P
  - file: psu-pic05.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      starting on the power cable that is to connect the power supply to the
      amplifier. the wires are solid 18-gauge copper, and will be enclosed
      in a shroud of heat shrink tubing.
  - file: psu-pic06.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      a pic showing how the toroidal transformer mounts to the bottom panel.
      the milled hole for the mounting bolt is cut in such a way as to limit
      its rotation, meaning only one tool (for the nut) is required to
      fasten the toroid. (also note the newly drilled and cut second
      revision boards.)
  - file: psu-pic07.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      it lives! i'm getting 14.68V<sub>dc</sub> after regulation with only
      2.5mV of 120Hz ripple, which is within normal limits.
  - file: psu-pic08.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      an idea of what the side red-oak panels are supposed to look like. i
      had to learn the hard way that cutting toolspeed is important, as you
      can see from the shrapnelized back-panel...
  - file: psu-pic09.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      the supply is starting to come together here, somewhat.
  - file: psu-pic10.png
    width: 800
    height: 600
    tip: >
      my first completed audio power supply, looking nice and shiny!
partsA:
  - part: 4672K-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.11
    num: 2
    desc: mica TO-220 insulator
  - part: 495-4010-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 2.36
    num: 1
    desc: 3.3uF polyester film cap
  - part: P10263-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 1.97
    num: 1
    desc: 4700uF FC elecrolytic cap
  - part: P4671-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.18
    num: 2
    desc: 0.47uF poly film cap
  - part: P100KCACT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 2
    desc: 100k metal film res
  - part: P4.70KCACT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 1
    desc: 4.7k metal film res
  - part: P68.0KCACT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 1
    desc: 68k metal film res
  - part: P150CACT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 1
    desc: 150R metal film res
  - part: P5.1W-1BK-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 1
    desc: 5.1R 1W metal film res
  - part: IRF610PBF-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 1.1
    num: 1
    desc: IRF610 N-ch MOSFET
  - part: LM317TNS-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 1.86
    num: 1
    desc: LM317 linear regulator
partsB:
  - part: 67-1916-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 3.21
    num: 1
    desc: spst switch with yellow led
  - part: P11247-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 3.27
    num: 2
    desc: 2700uF 35V FC electrolytic cap
  - part: P10321-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.28
    num: 1
    desc: 47uF 50V FC electrolytic cap
  - part: P10275-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.57
    num: 1
    desc: 470uF 35V FC electrolytic cap
  - part: P4671-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.18
    num: 7
    desc: 0.47uF polypropylene film cap
  - part: CMF1.10KHFCT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 1
    desc: 1.1k 1% metal film res
  - part: CMF100HFCT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.17
    num: 1
    desc: 100R 1% metal film res
  - part: 445-3741-1-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 1.8
    num: 1
    desc: 3.3uH 3.8A radial inductor
  - part: 1N4001FSCT-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.84
    num: 2
    desc: 50V 1A general use diode
  - part: MUR820GOS-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 0.11
    num: 4
    desc: 200V 8A ultrafast diode
  - part: 497-2982-5-ND
    vendor: digikey
    price: 7.41
    num: 1
    desc: LM350K TO-3 3A regulator
  - part: 122-605
    vendor: parts-express
    price: 25.8
    num: 1
    desc: 30VA 15V+15V toroidal trafo
---

# Introduction

It had been on my wish list for some time to build a MOSFET amplifier for a
pair of decent quality low-impedance (50 ohm or so) headphones, and [ this
circuit](http://diyaudioprojects.com/Solid/IRF610-Class-A-Headphone-Amp)
finally came along and spurred me into action. I did a quick test-run on a
breadboard to gain familiarity with the topology and circuit fundamentals
using an IRF630 and some stock resistors I had around. Quite shockingly, it
worked rather well, given the paucity of heat sinkage... **:P**

# First design

As a sanity check, I designed and built an essentially 'boilerplate'
CCS-loaded Szekeres amplifier, and to my surprise, nothing melted! gEDA
gschem and PCB were used to make the circuit schematic and printed circuit
board layout. I also used Berkeley SPICE for the first time to estimate the
circuit performance. Pictures of the first circuit design follow:

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

# Second design

Because the first design came together so well and actually worked, I was
greatly encouraged to revise the design to squeeze as much performance as
possible from the beautifully simple Szekeres topology. I decided on a
higher rail voltage of +15 V<sub>dc</sub> and a 'hotter' biasing voltage, I
increased the input AC coupling capacitor from 1.0 uF to 3.3 uF, and I
increased the output AC coupling capacitor from 470 uF to 4700 uF. And of
course, the pictures:

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

In order to try and quantify the effects that my modifications had on the
performance, I used some bash scripts and gnuplot to compare the SPICE
simulation results of the two designs. Needless to say, I was quite pleased
to see that gain, headroom, frequency response and phase response were all
improved. **:)** (_Trust me, I don't claim to be the first one to make these
changes, but the circuit feels more like my baby now, if that makes any
sense..._) The comparison results:

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

# Amplifier materials

All parts for a single channel of the Lassie amplifier can be purchased from
[Digi-Key](http://www.digikey.com).

{% include bom.html parts = page.partsA
   title="Single amp channel bill of materials" %}

# Power supply design

Since I didn't intend to power the amp from my 13.8 V<sub>dc</sub> bench
supply forever, I had to design a power supply. A requirement of all class-A
amplifiers is a low-noise power supply, as they have zero PSRR. taking cues
from gainclone and Morgan Jones' supplies, as well as some scraps of
experience, I put together a basic regulated power supply:

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

# Power supply materials

All parts for the regulated power supply of the Lassie amplifier can be
purchased from [Digi-Key](http://www.digikey.com), except the toroidal
transformer, which I bought from [Parts
Express](http://www.parts-express.com). The bill of materials follows.

{% include bom.html parts = page.partsB
   title="Regulated supply bill of materials" %}

# Construction notes

Sticking to what I knew, I developed presensitized boards in sodium
hydroxide and etched with ferric chloride. However, given the fact that I
had to make the boards in my dorm, I was game for trying new things. First,
I successfully incorporated a 25W red safe light. Second, I exposed the
circuit boards through _two_ epoxied transparency prints, instead of one, to
make the final traces perfect. I also drilled the through-holes on a mill
and cut the boards to size using a bandsaw.

The case construction was started once I had laid final plans for the
circuit board layout. I first used a band saw to cut a rough block (approx
4.5"x3"x1.75") down to approximate size and then I used a shell cutter to
precision mill the block to 3.5"x2.0"x1.5". I drilled through-holes for the
phone jacks (3/8" dia.) and DC power jack (7/16" dia.) and then made
through-holes for the side-panel mounting screws using a #25 bit. The
mounting holes were then tapped for #10-24 screws. On the top and bottom of
the case, I drilled out TO-220 mounting holes using a #25 bit and then,
using a 1/4" endmill, milled out room for the screw heads to fit flush with
the case walls. Finally, I hollowed out the interior of the block using a
3/8" dia. end-mill.

Mounting the circuit boards inside the case was tricky, since electrical
isolation was required. The boards were secured by two stainless steel #6-32
hex head machine screws through the two TO-220 packaged components, with
mica insulators underneath them and a nylon nut above them, ensuring
isolation. A section of teflon tubing was also cut to thread onto the screws
between the screw threads and the TO-220 tabs, and the mounting holes of
each TO-220 component were widened with #19 drill bits in a vise. The
conductive traces on the bottoms of the circuit boards were isolated from
the case with spray-on conformal coating.

The mirrored finish on the aluminum was achieved by first using 600, 1500,
and 2000 grit wet sanding paper under a faucet, with a sandal for a sanding
block, and then applying a white polishing compound until the part was
shiny. **:)** I was able to pick up the above supplies and terry cloths for
polishing from a local AutoZone, and the finish, as is visible in the
photographs, is quite spectacular.

Finally, the wooden sides were cut from a stock 0.5" thickness red oak board
using a table saw, and then sanded down to the precise dimensions of the
aluminum housing. Before finishing, through-holes for mounting were drilled
into the wood using a #3 bit and countersinked. I milled a 0.2"-deep recess
into the inside of each wood panel with a 3/16" endmill. I then applied a
first coat of stain to the wooden panels before filling the pores of the oak
in with minwax filler and applying the final coats of (minwax cherry) stain.
Green adhesive felt feet were added to the undersides of the wood panels to
keep the aluminum chassis section off the table surface for better cooling.

The power supply enclosure was a bit trickier, as more parts were used in
the final case. Three 1/4"-thick aluminum blocks were cut to rough size and
endmilled to 1.15"x3" (1) and 5.25"x3" (2). Eight mounting holes in each top
and bottom face were made using a #3 drill and a 5/16" endmill for the
#10-24 screw heads which would be used. The same tools were used to mill a
pocket for an M5 bolt to mount the toroidal trafo to the bottom panel. Vent
holes were milled using a 1/8" endmill in the top panel. The small aluminum
block was drilled to hold the TO-3 voltage regulator such that it is
isolated from the other two aluminum panels. Wood side panels were cut and
mitered to dimensions required to form the outer walls of the case. Both
materials were finished using the same techniques used on the amplifier
case.

# Listening notes

My first impressions of the finalized amp were made with 32 ohm Philips
phones, which I had thought until now were better than average. To be safe
while burning in the output electrolytics and heating up the two active
elements per channel for the first time, I stuck with the Philips. Once I
trusted the reliability of the amplifier and power supply, I plugged in my
new Sennheiser HD595 phones for the real tests. Honestly, the combined amp
and phones sounded beyond amazing. It felt as though someone had taken hold
of the left side of the frequency response curve and ripped it off. Bass was
stronger and more tightly controlled, mids were warm and clean, and highs
were defined without being too bright. I know the topology isnt for
everybody, and it isnt the lowest distortion out there, but the sound, in my
humble opinion, is wonderful.

But then again, I'm biased. **;)**

# Amplifier pictures

Some pictures to prove the amplifier exists and works! **:)**

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

# Enclosure pictures

Some pictures of the enclosure I built from scratch for the amplifier,
thanks to the patient instruction of Scott in the Texas Tech Chemistry
department machine shop.

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

# Power supply pictures

Some pictures of the power supply and its enclosure I built for the Lassie
amplifier. I had to match the beauty of the amplifier itself, so yet another
aluminum-and-oak enclosure had to be fashioned for the supply too.

{% include gallery.html dir="lassie" images=page.images %}

